Let me start by indicating that. There's going to be three parts to this seminar at an introductory 10 minutes where I kind of guess. You mentally warmed up, if you will for the theoretical material to follow.
	A listing of a of an actual concrete training program.
	Any break, whereby or where after Brian Johnson's going to do a practical. Get started here with the introductory material.
	While I will be providing you today with an actual training program, actually later in the seminar. I want you to know from the outset ladies and gentlemen, that my purpose today. My primary purpose is to see something meaningful a value that is about a logical approach to the subject of productive body building exercise. Watch the kids after all man's method of gaining knowledge, which is his means of survival and is therefore the most fundamental value in human existence.
	Man is not an essential feature of you, been reading about him. Especially the weed or magazines.
	Now don't sweat some of these words writing. You, you came here to learn something today. Hopefully in value where words are new, Don't Be Afraid, write them down and look them up later on. You might find that they will prove of Great Value in your future thinking and and learning.
	Instincts are different form of knowledge that is hardwired into animals and therefore guides them not volitional a by choice, but automatically and unerringly.
	Man is a conceptual, the two games and use his knowledge, only by a process of thought or a volitional, cognitive a I stated previously.
	And it is because one must exercise is power.
	Ephrata.
	They apparently find the effort involves too much or not to their liking.
	As a humorous side note, here years ago, when I was working for Joe Weider out of his office. As in Woodland Hills, one of his top editors and eyes were joking about the Weider and sinker principle when my cohort had me cracking up thing. Mike, people were clock to follow their instincts.
	Are they wouldn't left the weights, that all they would defecate and urinate on them?
	Wasn't that funny?
	Having been brought up in an anti Iraq and across her money or not talk to Value logic. And that's never achieved what I refer to as intellectual self-sufficiency.
	That is the ability to think logically rationally and to judge independently for yourself a gentleman that's having muscles that would do credit to an adult gorilla. When you can't even think the fact of life about a subject like bodybuilding, which is a passionate concern.
	People have uncritically accepted face as a means of knowledge of ideas for which there is no sensory proof or rational evidence.
	Along with the idea that you should know that you should judge not.
	You also hear the other admonition.
	Keep an open mind.
	The idea that one should not judge her or that he should keep. An open mind, is actually very dangerous. Literally, it is used to keep you confused by suggesting. It is a supplies Park possibility that everything.
	Something can be true.
	Send some ideas. You read about contradict the other ideas. How can they all be true? Simple logic? And remember? That's what my purpose is here. Today, in addition to providing you with a national training program. I'd like to teach you at least something of value about a logical approach.
	No, you should not be concerned with developing an open mind. But instead of mine, one like three sides of critically.
	Seeking to distinguish truth from falsehood.
	The approach, your most bodybuilders, the training from the Star amounts to little more than a blind leap into the dark throughout life. We all you and I everybody work harder, were taught to think rationally, or most of us are
	Such a theory to employ. I'm subject to a crutch bodybuilding after does.
	Good for you. You're one of the rational few.
	In fact, I did realize, I was like this when I was in my late teens, most symptomatic was the notion that if something was printed, it had to be true.
	I learned later that my notion was illogical.
	As of course not every idea can be true as I said earlier, because so many of them and contradict each other is in fact, you know. Something is printed doesn't mean a lot of studying. Later. I realized that mr. Jones was, in fact being charitable. It's not 90% of what is printed. All subjects is outright hogwash. It's closer. To 98%, literally 98% of what you and I as Canadians and Americans 98.
	We live in a semi free country and everything. They write of coercing.
	Understanding this audience is a first step toward developing your critical of building your critical ability. Like I suggested earlier you're here today. So learn just because you hear A New Concept new, turn them down and think about it later and incorporate him into your thinking.
	As much as this seminar is about the human body and it's and it's improving. This seminar is actually more about the human mind and its Improvement. Why? Why would a seminar on bodybuilding? Also be about the mine?
	Because obviously logically you don't have to be a genius. We all know that's a level of awareness. Human intelligence is what makes it possible to understand anything, including exercise or bodybuilding science.
	And that is. What does that was his most interesting to all of us? Namely us. We the member of the species, man.
	As someone once said, the Divine spark in the great chain of being, we human beings of all living species on Earth.
	All too often by many even those in the bodybuilding feel that we bodybuilders are dumb and stupid, which simply isn't true by the number phone calls. I receive every single day. All seven days a week, 365 days a year.
	I receive phone calls every day from people from all walks of life, including doctors, stockbroker, students crazy truck drivers people who are obviously very productive, quite frightened and challenging who also just happened to be bodybuilder.
	I will not talk down to you today on the assumption that you the audience. So like intellectual death that you are incapable of exercising, the mental effort required in a great knowledge of a higher order.
	Nor will I insult your intelligence by expecting you to accept anything that I might Mentor. Have to say, merely because I want a handful of bodybuilding contest. So what big deal we have scores of bodybuilders who have one more contest and I have and they couldn't even spell or undefined the word exercise site.
	It is only on the basis of graphing. The logic of
	That one should agree as to whether or not it's true.
	Nor will I bore you with a type of intellectual pablum or baby food? You've read so often some of the muscle magazine.
	The vast majority of Articles written on the subject of training, consist of little more than a form of exercise and Val shall perform five sets of that. One y, never any reason when I see you say audience, the realm of the intellect, the human mind.
	Which again, is the central focus of today, star is much more demanding than the average bodybuilder. Realiser. I'm sorry, the bodybuilding Ryder realizes or recognizes formulating, a valid, non contradictory theory of training requires knowledge. Not just a few men physiology.
	A mere passing chart.
	Of the arbitrary content of one subconscious onto a piece of paper is just that intellectual vomit.
	As a man of reason for doing something at all, which is the way to proceed.
	What this seminar is about. I'm not here just to give you another training program and expect you to blindly follow. It. Would that be worth the 40 bucks in the time? You spend it to come here today?
	Seminar is about a reason, Cristobal logical approach to the subject as the required mental ever.
	I presume after all that you came to Mississauga today.
	Because of your enthusiastic desire to achieve your muscular potential, maybe for personal reason, the stereo the Canadian Champion. There might even be those in here who aspire to be mr. Olympia.
	Most important. You the audience already understands that the basis of a rational logical approach to bodybuilding or any other Arena of human endeavor?
	The basis of a rational intelligence logical approach to exercise or any other Arena of human endeavor. Is the recognition that only appropriate knowledge can lead you to engage in the appropriate required to achievable.
	We all kind of sort of know that on some level of awareness, but if you don't acknowledge.
	Know. The material on today seminar is not infinitely complex, but it's not in selectel. Pamela m.
	Define all your other concern for the few hours.
	Focus on the logic of my ideas and once and for all clear up any and all confusing.
	That won't be a problem for you since you're already on confusing. That's fine. I'm not laughing at you.
	It's no fun being confused or uncertain.
	Then audience, you will be able to proceed with the greatest power, the ball to, a human being the power of one of my favorite word intellect.
	Not muscular power.
	but the power,
	which can only be gained when you truly grasp fully recognize the power of ideas, the realm of the intellect. Discipline exercise science in the next.
	interdependent hierarchy of ideas that makes up the contact, the bodybuilding science again, so that you the audience
	Will leave here not with just one more exercise program, but the ability to think more clearly logically about the subject.
	And go on to confidently and excessively to see if your bodybuilding goals. And in fact about the areas of life.
	And lead a more rewarding and more fulfilling life overall.
	Before concluding this introductory facts and audience. I'd like to address one important point that will serve in fact as I direct Prelude to the next.
	And it has to do with a mirror. The near-universal confusion with regard to the fact that there can only be one valid theory of proper, reductive bodybuilding exercise, or any other subject for that matter.
	This subject is specially responsible, for most of the failures and bodybuilding. And I can tell you unequivocally more bodybuilders.
	Most bodybuilders, probably most of you and here like I did it one time. I'm not putting you down most of you. I was there at one time too, but I'm a little bored. I've learned a lot in the last 20 years.
	Most bodybuilders make the mistake of approaching the subject of bodybuilding training with the idea that all series have some Merit or are of equal value.
	Precious Precious time graphically.
	Looking into all these different theories. Hoping, that somehow someday someway, you'll find one that works.
	And as a result, literally, I'm not exaggerating here for effect.
	I talked to bodybuilders everyday from all over the world, literally every day, all day 7 days a week, 365 days a year, and I do a lot of seminars.
	The most Salient characteristic of the vast majority of bodybuilders I meet is that they are confused and the confusion results and they're not achieving their goal. You know what I'm talking about. How many bodybuilders do you know who are not?
	Infinitely. Bewildered disconcertingly confused. At least. 99%.
	In fact that cannot possibly be true that all or many, or even to training theories are of equal Merit.
	You have to keep in mind here with a theory is a theory is a set of abstract principles, which purports to be either a reality and or a guide for successful Human Action. There probably is.
	Is there anybody here? Who would like to make the point that there's more than one reality?
	Or got we have at least a semi rationale of it.
	Since I was only one reality, obviously, there's only one.
	Just as there is only one valid Siri.
	Opthamologist. What is the theory of human knowledge?
	It's the only theory of high-intensity training.
	The science of actor. Ladies and gentlemen, science of medicine is based on an understanding of the principles of human physiology with a capital H. That means they apply to everybody after all four. Here. I would say we're all members of the human being.
	Which of course are Universal. That is applicable to all human. Then if every human beings were constituted in medical science, couldn't couldn't make diagnosis perform surgeries or dispense medicine.
	It is the precise fact of human physiology, or obviously Universal.
	Is what makes it possible for me to spray?
	Every human being literally, every human being requires intense training to stimulate growth. It is a, well authenticated be on the base, because the magnitude of the toll hyper-conscious with regard to volume.
	Overtraining remember is not just a mistake. It's a biggest mistake. You can make from increases in strength and size about that. Later.
	The major philosophic.
	Of this seminar, dear listener.
	One cannot know that he's on the right cord individual from New York to Los Angeles. Will consult a map a map? Interesting Lee enough about how to get from point A to point B.
	Without the map he would get lost lose, whatever starting to and motivation. He may have had and perm terminate his effort along the way. Now is like any other value has to be gained through a volitional, effort, and active choice.
	Anyone smart anyone here today, and it's all of you enough to learn the ABC.
	Phone consultation client Duty high intensity training.
	Surprise University.
	Guided by one set of never changing principal and that's the cause and effect for those who want to learn to think, logically about exercise or anything else cause and effect.
	Even though the vast majority of so-called experts in this field has failed to grasp it.
	I concluded by pointing out that this individual, that it is reality, and its laws the laws of nature, you know.
	The causes which must be on normal level.
	Causes of laws are clearly understood in reality that, of course, required for is really rather simple.
	Nature also dictates what mental causes?
	We were talking earlier second ago about physical causes nature and intellectual understanding of any subject.
	You must first recognize that all human knowledge has a nature. Your body has a nature, right? Your brain is a part of your body. Your mind is a part of your brain, your brain.
	Hierarchical instructor.
	The fundamental principles are ideas.
	Before moving up The Logical ladder. This may be most readily observed. Of course in the field of mathematical science. And remember, we're here today to talk about exercise were talking something here in the abstract about the nature of knowledge itself.
	Dirt or mathematical knowledge. There is a base of fundamentals. Which of course are what?
	Addition, subtraction, multiplication.
	It is only on the basis of first graphing. These fundamental that one may zenzio efficacious or with derivatives such as algebra and calculus.
	The major reason why you are so many bodybuilders are confused, is that you failed to take the time to gain an understanding that the context of knowledge, which constitutes bodybuilding exercise science, has a base of fundamental principles. The major reason, why most bodybuilders are confused is that they don't understand that. The context of knowledge, which constitute bodybuilding exercise science, has a base of fundamental principles. Which again is what I came here for.
	This is the first thing. You have to logically understand that.
	The body of knowledge constituting exercise science as a base, a foundation of fundamental principle.
	Which related issues of intensity and frequency?
	I told you, I talked to bodybuilders every day, every single day. I hear bodybuilders asking questions about training that or something like the equivalent of house when they figure out the simple subject of productive bodybuilding exercise.
	Audience wants approach, the subject of what makes muscles grow Beyond normal levels. Like a good exercise scientist might. Now you have to use your imagination hair cuz I am.
	Reserve, innumerable bodybuilders and strength athletes workout.
	Conclude what makes muscles grow, right?
	Logical the workout.
	How does he find out? Where is the good exercise scientist launches investigation?
	One of the more readily observe quality.
	What does quantity, the volume, the number of scientist was concerned himself with a number of plants being performed?
	People who perform no training exercise. Has a little muscles or muscles of normal size. And those who may be just perhaps,
	hey negro simulation is directly related to the volume of the exercise.
	In order to test a hypothesis or hypostasis is Arthur Jones pronounce that. I'm not sure what the correct pronunciation.
	The hypothesis hypothesis has numerous individual training over a. Of time during which the volume of the side, roads progressively greater and greater. But something is terribly wrong. Limited volume result in a complete lack of progress, grow weaker and cannot be directly related.
	Or if it was the training, the training subject who trained, the most would have the biggest muscles.
	While the notion that more is better, is attractive than its Simplicity. It just doesn't work that idea.
	You're obviously such as in are we wonder why the rest of the world chance glasses?
	More is better means, more is better. There's a building guarantee. You can tell if eggs are good if what he said to give you good results and why stop there he will give you even better and even better still and 123.
	I want to say and many of my recent article is better for us and the whole body is better. And after 2 years of no results. They say, I'm either morally deficient. I'm suffering from some who knows? Why I can't make.
	The most important issue in bodybuilding is that there is no right way to train. Only if people trained properly and make progress, or the people involved, people like me doing. All right.
	So there you are the obvious to newest. The Monument of the volume argument, all wrapped up in a singular, childlike, stupid notion, that more is better.
	As I sell some of my flying, the idea more is better. Only has validity when it comes the money and pretty girls that has very little or nothing to do with exercise.
	The idea that more is better is erroneous a logical and rational non-productive counterproductive.
	And on a lesser level, stupid in that third is ridiculous.
	Look up Matthew audien.
	In the gym exercise or athletic training of any sort performs at, of course, have to do a certain amount of volume self responsible for triggering growth. Those who perform the most resides in every case would have the largest muscles and we all know that ain't true.
	I know people who transfer hours literally hours a day for years. I know one phone in for seven years using every variation of the volume across from waiter to Serious drug to whatever.
	The vast majority of bodybuilders do fail to achieve your goals. And probably, I was just amazed that 99% of you and here are frustrated to how many are you? How many of you in here, looking back over the last year, or two or three adding up the hundreds, even thousands of hours of Blood Sweat, and Tears, can honestly say that you got a proper return on your investment.
	One person. You must be a high intensity trainer.
	Yeah, that's two of you too, rational individual.
	But we're not giving up on the rest of you.
	Even though we seem like Creek.
	We're very loving.
	We do care about the future of the world. We like to have you fart.
	Yeah, everyone. And anyone who exercises whether it's aerobically, anaerobically athletically or otherwise.
	As a side, note here, later in my pocket. Jiggly demonstrate that. In fact, the volume number of sets is a neck.
	Literally true. I'm not thinking out of Park Place volume number of fat, in body building exercise science. And Brian is one of the few people who really understand. This is 8 trillion - -
	The vast majority who exercise typically do so for 1 hour.
	Why one our wealth, the most of us conveniently schedule our lives by the hour, we watch Laverne and Shirley by the hour. We get paid by the hour. We go to the psychiatrist by the hour. Therefore, it's only logical like trained by the hour.
	Most people do Train by the hour. Doesn't invariably result in the same or similar or muscular mass increases.
	So where do we now turn to discover the variable? What is that? One thing about the exercise? The workout wear that we now look to discover the element responsible for stimulating growth including a great place to go. But what the quality?
	Listen to hypothetically. That's against hypothetically. That any one of you here to currently 100 lb barbell for a maximum of 10 reps and failure. And by that, I mean,
	Obviously, the first rap events, that would be the easiest who would deny that the first rapper or we would say more technically Forsyth. The first rap would require the least sensitive.
	That first rap does. But you you a little bit. However, even if only slightly, that's why the second rap is always harder. We're at the first required on the order of eight or 10%, intensity of a the second recipes you even further of course. And the third still requiring as you know, that's how it goes with a six-pack of rough is harder than the last.
	Concept is in pain. That would be the only rap where we say. It requires, literally 100% intensity of effort.
	My question to you is this obviously would be the most. I couldn't use the word obviously, cuz like I'm leading you there.
	Which represents that would be the most productive in terms of stimulating and optimal size and strength, increase. The first rap, which is the easiest and least, Intense, or the last rep, the hardest one, the only rep requiring 100% intensity liver.
	The last rep. Now, I've had, I've had some people in the past day, the first ref.
	Because they were anxious.
	Or they didn't have normal inside functioning brain.
	And that's okay because some people aren't born with more friends, as long as anybody that has a hundred pounds for 10 reps. Now, you would never do this, but hypothetically never attempt. Would you ever grow know?
	The intensity to be more specific when is not sufficiently threatening to your body. So large and it's the response that is a strength and size build up just like you couldn't watch the game, suntan lotion. You rubbed all over your belly button that 100 watt, light bulb is not intense enough to threaten the response.
	You see audience, most people think of developing a suntan or developing larger vessels or something nearly cosmetics. And by cosmetic, I mean, to improve your appearance, but of course major couldn't care less, if you were a blond Adonis on the beach with a 22-inch arm.
	The development of a suntan just like the development of large your muscles, both of those things represent, literally just sent the barriers, the body build to protect itself from future result of high-intensity stress weather, high intensity, ultraviolet Sunrise, dress or high, intensity anaerobic exercise.
	Executing that last almost impossible run causes the body to dip into its Reserve capacity or ability. And since your body obviously only has a very limited Reserve ability, the body protect itself from future. Assaults on its Reserve by enlarging upon its existing ability through the compensatory buildup and more muscle mass.
	But that's probably the most intelligent statement in my whole seminar today. It's very abstract.
	So, this is not, this is not a put-down. It's raining body here who would like me to restate that?
	I understand the first time I read that, I had no clue. What the hell that bad.
	But after I understood, I got so excited. You couldn't peel me off the ceiling for 2 days.
	Executing that last almost impossible rap.
	Causes the body to dip into a syringe survivability.
	Not the first rappers who easy?
	Now, since the body only has a small amount of this Reserve to draw van.
	A small amount of Reserve ability to draw the for depletion occurred, the body protect itself from future. Assaults on its Reserve.
	By enlarging upon its existing ability, through the content from Pensacola Rebuilder of more muscle mass. That one statement incapsulate the entire science, a body building exercise, but it's very difficult to grasp on. That doesn't mean you're stupid. That just means you're not God light.
	When you first sat down then in kindergarten, did you fully understand? The ABC? I didn't, I was kind of slow, it took me weeks, but now we fully understand it later on.
	Only high intensity exercise, can force the body to resort to this Reserve ability. Once again sufficiently to stimulate an Adaptive response in the form of a muscle mass increase.
	Repeating patterns that are well within your existing capacity 10 body. I've no reason to grow.
	You have to attempt.
	Better be on your existing capacity. That's what stimulates growth and the train or something apocalyptic and a bunch of others in the world.
	There's nothing wrong with trying to tell your you have to trade the failure to stimulate its strength and size increase.
	T a s k. S repeating past that are well within your existing capacity capacity. He has the capacity to curl a hundred pounds for 10 reps, and the body.
	Follow that.
	Okay, thank you. I can leave right now. I feel fulfilled.
	Carrying a sack to the point where you are forced to utilize 100% of your momentary. Muscular ability, audience is the single most important factor in increasing strength, in size order.
	Interesting to know here.
	Even the detractors of high-intensity training for Siri have to admit that the last rep of us. That is the most productive think about it. You all these people.
	Who claimed high intensity training theory? Is that? What's the first principle of the theory of high-intensity training the principle of intensity when they say high intensity doesn't work. There's no.
	Come on.
	I had a client of mine. He's now a good stay quiet. I was telling Brian is earlier. He called me several months ago. He was in a quandary. He said, Mike. I don't know. I'm awfully confused. I don't know if I should sign up with you or Charles fall again, and you can sign up for him. You deserve each other.
	Anybody who has the point?
	If you believe that the first rap of the sets of failure is better than the last rep of the set. Stupid, that you don't deserve my presence as Arthur Jones yesterday.
	Are you forgot something very wrong with you?
	Obviously, the last rep of the sense of failure is the most productive.
	Now, they're having a few individual.
	Necessarily high-intensity Advocates, who have raised the intelligent question, saying everybody who's against high intensity has no intelligence. They're just on their developmental wages, finally embracing this.
	Remind me not to surly.
	A few individuals have raised the intelligent question as to whether it is actually necessary to train to failure. They say 10:30 of Africa is absolutely required to stimulate growth. Maybe it's only 60 or 80 or 90.
	A good question. How do we know? Well, the problem here, audience would be in 11 in measuring intensity. There are in fact, only two perfectly accurate measures of intensity on your totally at rest.
	100% intensity. One-year, exerting yourself with maximum effort.
	So long, here's the point. So long as you are exerting yourself with 100% intensity of effort. You will have passed through every possible. Break over Point. 62% 78493 as long as you go to 100.
	That's why we keep stress and Graves and failure is not going to hurt you.
	Not only as a desirable was absolutely necessary. So that you know, you stimulated growth.
	Did I help anybody?
	most of you know, this already
	No, it's new material reflect on what you wrote down later again. Just like the first time you saw down in kindergarten. You didn't fully understand the 80s every month. Grabbing up a handful of magazine running home. Locking the bedroom door. Hoping that someday, you'll find it doesn't work.
	Pacific physiological. Characteristics training causes styes.
	The primary cause of the tournament determinant the first. Cause the most important thing in simpler language is Granny strap.
	While the imposition of a high intensity training. Stress is a first necessary cause that is not sufficient cause to effect an optimal increase. There is another very important that the illogical characteristic, which must be considered one that has been perpetually ignored by the bodybuilding Orthodoxy, my exercise fires and more likely than not by you.
	This particular idea. This is physiological characteristics has been ignored, which is why most of you here today has failed to achieve your strength and bodybuilding goal, and a very with absolute utter certainty that the majority of you of you. And here today are frustrated having failed to come even. So your body building gold and, you know, I'm right, and I don't have a crystal ball.
	Those who are unaware of the nature role in value of fundamental principles. Remember it at the house that I described? What fundamental principles are.
	Those who are unaware of the role of fundamental principles. Usually have a very difficult if not impossible, time achieving their goals.
	Being emotionally driven instead of conceptually directed.
	That is their desire to achieve. A goal is great enough. That's all they need you here, fire.
	Never having made it a policy to check for inappropriate again. Morris better everyday.
	Eventually, I have to succeed, everything I've heard in the culture.
	Everything I've read suggests that, if I'm, if I'm afraid, I will succeed with the Arthur. Arthur Arnold. Schwarzenegger's favorite concrete Concepts.
	Every failure.
	Well, the joke is on them, house is practically wrong. They are as I indicated them numerous times. Just a while ago, is the laws of nature, the training causes that must be a nice if you are a few years old needs, a ray of Hope, or dream of Desire.
	Is sufficient to cause a muscle mass increase.
	Care. How special your mommy think you are to pray to God it nice.
	Not enough to affect a buildup of Michael Massey on normal levels.
	I made the point a minute ago that man physiologic maker, man, the illogic nature. The man should have a high intensity training necessary cause but that it is not scarred results.
	Whatta Man.
	Cautiously regulated in terms of volume and frequency. It is his strictly limited recovery ability.
	The human being does not possess, and then nothing in the universe is infinite, even the universe itself, including the biochemical reserve of resources that make up recovery ability.
	This pack is what let Arthur Jones to say. It is only rational to use that which exists in limited Supply as economically as possible.
	View of us. Was that a high intensity? Training is an absolute requirement for stimulating growth.
	The problem, most people have this is important, the problem. Most people have it.
	While the principle of intensity must be understood first as the requisite, that's the first wrestlers that I'm sorry for understanding anything else of value about exercise recovery.
	The fact of a limited recovery ability is the next key Concepts that must be grass in the hierarchy of scientific knowledge in exercise. Physiology is the only on the basis of knowing that the body has a limited.
	That one may understand why the volume and frequency of exercise must be cautious. Lay regulated.
	Again, once you understand intensity, this is the second most important Concept in the entirety of all of exercise science.
	I realized they never gain the full attention. It deserves, which is why so many of you continue to Chronic layover train.
	In fact, I think about it for a second to reflect for a moment. When was the last time, any of you saw the term recovery ability used by the body building Orthodox in any of those muscle magazines or comic book?
	As I have stated repeatedly in my books and articles but they just don't have much knowledge of the average exercise science yesterday, doesn't even know what recovery ability is.
	Being the lazy dumb bastards. They are, literally, I don't say that with any slightest pause guards. They deserve the title. Dr. Kramer not doctor today from Weider because of Kraemer, and flex said that's how all the Champions Trace.
	They totally ignore the issue of a limited recovery ability.
	All of you and here, I presume it. Worked out at some point or another, when you're done working out after an hour or two or even 30 minutes, aren't you tired? That's obvious proof. You have a limited recovery ability, but these guys, they know that doesn't count their real.
	You got this. I was in their whole lives in the Ivory Tower and they know everything about everything. Now. I realize that the other old saying is true and it's true. I meant maybe to p a g into my life is literally deserve the title of a doctor of philosophy in history.
	Remember we live in an anti rational culture. Do you think the field of exercise science would be exempt? Know, I would think they'd be among the first to become stupid.
	The fact that limited recovery ability is strictly limited to a logical conclusion.
	That's the volume or number. It's so far that your science is a negative.
	because,
	For every set you a farm.
	Once a tooth has three sets for every successive that you perform. There is made a deeper and deeper in Road into the body's limited recovery ability about the negative.
	In order to understand the concept of in Road audience, you might think of it as the term. Clearly suggests. You do a small hole deeper hole even deeper in Road more of your recovery. Ability has to be wasted or recovery in the mountain on top the muscle.
	But, of course, you have to do at least, once that to have a workout. Remember, how I started this faction on volume. I said, the issue of volume is that negative? But, of course, you have to do at least one step to have a workout.
	Ideally, we can figure out a way to stimulate growth was your body recovery ability recovery. I haven't figured out yet, how to stimulate growth was Zero set.
	On occasion. I have had a phone call and ask the question. Mike. Would it really make a difference?
	As I was saying, a second ago, about the importance of this issue of recovery ability. It should be one of the two issues of most Central concern. Literally every ability should be one of the two, most important issues of central concern and exercise science. And they all, but completely invaded.
	In one of the more recent issues of flex magazine, one of the leaders top champs playing to perform 45 total stats for work out which, of course, the mouse, The Chronic gross ridiculous overtraining.
	Which can only be engaged in, by the way of nightmarish quantities of steroids, growth hormones. And many of these new drugs, which I can sell, or haven't taken of times. Now, to print out.
	Considering that we stopped after only doing 45 s, i find rather interesting that the vaunted exercise, the scientific establishment.
	On occasion. I've had a phone client asked, Mike. Would it make a difference? What it real, they could do a second-set. You keep making such a big deal about doing one Fest.
	Can I respond something to the effect that?
	Doing a second that is neither necessary nor desirable.
	In fact, it would be the biggest mistake. You can make going from one set to two sessions looks really. The biggest mistake you can make cigar is going from one to two. Audience is not merely a linear increase of 1 unit 12 to go get a little bit more growth. Simulation stimulation.
	How to roast bodybuilders train today, or how long they can endure? And that's wrong, of course, because bodybuilding is not aerobic. A bodybuilding workout is not an endurance contest in Venice, California? By the end of the first work out, my new clients would look at his wife and he goes. But God might that was only 16 minutes. I feel like I can do more and my reply would be
	The point I'm underscoring here again audience is that your purpose? As a bodybuilder is not to go to the gym, to either prove or improve your interest, but merely a growth with one session failure. Now, if you don't like dollars than $1 to talkin about economic here, if you don't like the number one positive slowly under control and breath is actually made up of three units, the positive and the negative.
	Even if we respect.
	You also made a 100% greater enrolled in the recovery ability, making it that much harder to recover from the workout. Let alone build a mountain on one of those. Just now, the third fundamental principle of exercise science, ladies and gentlemen, the one relating to the frequency of training.
	Your car's of your failure to experience. Meaningful progress has a volume bodybuilder or possibly, even a high intensity bodybuilder relates to overtraining.
	If you think I'm overstating it or I mention the issue of overtraining too often. In my articles. You're mistaken.
	Considering that overtraining is the major cause of lack of progress.
	That most bodybuilders fail to achieve their goals because of it and that the Orthodox sing along with exercise science as unconscionably. Evaded the point of understanding the importance of overtraining.
	Bodybuilding is not dying because of drug use, but because Weider and the powers-that-be continue to blindly promulgate the notion that volume over training is the best way to proceed. While informing you that there's take outrageous, quantities of drugs to help counter.
	I find it curious that the great majority of bodybuilders knowing that overtraining means something obviously decidedly negative. Never look into the issue, seriously.
	Term overtraining is always used in a negative context, by using it as a positive.
	Try using the term overtraining positive.
	By definition overt Raining, Men performing any more exercise in terms of both volume and frequency than his minimally or precisely required to stimulate growth. The majority of bodybuilders today, still seem to operate on the notion that their purpose. As I said earlier. You should go into the gym to see how many sets they can do how long how much they can take or how long they can mindlessly in. The building is not aerobic. In other words, ladies and gentlemen, a bodybuilding workout is not an endurance contest.
	Bear in mind that your actual literal purpose as a bodybuilder is to go to the gym and intelligently rationally, logically merely to activate the growth mechanism, then get the hell out the home resting Grove.
	Many bodybuilders today, apparently still don't understand that the big picture in bodybuilding is comprised. Especially I emphasize the word, especially
	The biggest like you might write this down. I'm going to elaborate on this next personal point for a few minutes and we're going to go into an actual outline of a real training program. This is the last personal point.
	Most bodybuilders today, do not understand that. The big picture is comprised, especially of two elements of equal value. I am surprised the word equal by equal value. I mean, literally 50/50 was 50/50 chance, of course, is the actual work out who would deny that. But just as important. Between
	And here's why.
	The workout you must understand does not actually produce. The word is produce produce muscular grow. Remember?
	A stimulus, it stimulates what the body grows mechanism into motion by further, director has going at the fishing rights.
	Or you can say it's simply another words. If you don't rest enough you don't grow enough.
	If a call.
	Now, here's the Crux of the problem. How does anybody know with reasonable certainty? That enough time is the lasting impacts of Clean workout?
	The answer is to be found in the following.
	Immediately upon the workout. You don't feel the same as you did before the workout. Do you?
	You're tired, exhausted.
	In addition, just don't throw it at me.
	In addition to the personal experience of feeling fatigued, you have also exhausted in the testicles to take a portion of your body's resources up or recovery.
	Recall from earlier that or do a number of set. You make what's called a what and then rode into your recovery ability. The first thing, your body must do after the workout is not grow, but what?
	Recover all over, or is Arthur Jones.
	Compensate for the exhaustive effect of the work was there before the workout.
	And here's the important Point related to that the process of recovery overcoming be in Rhode. Filling. The hole is not completed. In fact, the completion of the recovery, across the completion of the recovery process itself may take several days or weeks or longer.
	They can take the body several days or longer to complete the recovery process before the body. Even has a chance to start building the mountain on top, which is overcompensating building muscle.
	Before the recovery process is completed. You will short-circuit the grocery.
	That's correct. The recovery process alone.
	May take several days to be completed.
	And here's the proof.
	Everybody builder in here of any age.
	Has had the experience of Performing its tremendous leg workout with say on a Friday afternoon after work.
	And then after resting all weekend, you wake up on Monday, and you're still generally siping.
	Your legs may feel more or less recovered, but you still experience a sense of generalize or if you know what I mean?
	One of the chief sources of confusion on the issue of frequency. This is very important. One of the chief sources of confusion on the issue or frequency and Judah, bodybuilders not realizing all your work also has a pneumothorax long enough to clean workout to allow for localized Muscle Recovery, like the legs. Were they armed with the recovery?
	If I see a good friend of mine, one of the guys here for my website, a very brilliant fellow Named. Dave has some of you may know.
	One of the most intelligent things in this regard, I ever heard. He said, Mike, we should not be prescribing. Rigid formulas for frequency. Chromosome, progress chart. Maybe wait 10 days, greater recovery.
	If you left, the rest. Is just as important, then I assume most of you here do.
	Just like number of steps today.
	There has to be a perfect frequency of perfect, optimum number of days, of rest between sets.
	Or literally almost magic compared to any other profile protocol. Broward between workout is either for Recovery or drug production.
	And no, absolutely not decompensation. Does not taste like be compensation by the term decompensation Franklin.
	A number of years ago, I asked numerous bodybuilders including some of the top ones like Dory in the eighth. I said to them. They have you ever noticed that after a layoff of the week or even two or even longer sometime that you always come back stronger and they all responded in the fact, you know, Mike is kind of odd that you bring that up after a week or two.
	Well, if these individuals if you come back stronger after a layoff, you're stronger Center Point. Here. Is that do not worry, you will not decompensate after one to two weeks. So therefore, you're not going to be compensated after 4 days.
	Okay.
	That's really all I have to say on the issue of frequency, a few words to conclude that theoretical material better, trying.
	What you have just heard ladies and gentlemen, was not intended as an exhaustive Treatise on the subject of exercise science.
	More important of Greater practical necessity term, fundamentals of bodybuilding science perspective on the subject.
	If you do not fully understand all the issues you heard today, then check your nose at somebody. Once I know why he emphasizes.
	A particular subject and they don't get it on the first reading, your somehow mentally lacking, that's not true. Even brilliant, genius and have to re-read and Riri read and reread it over and over.
	Wear concepts are new.
	Don't Be Afraid, don't your best friend, the dictionary and fire over them by that. I mean other related I have in your subconscious.
	Before long, you'll have a firm thorough understanding such that you'll be able to move ahead as a rational results. You always believed to be possible.
	The following is a concrete ization. The word is conferences. Akin everything you just heard was theoretical material. Now. We're going to bring all that the in reality.
	The following is the ultimate consequence and final practical application of the abstract Theory, Justice Drive finished training program. A modified improved version of the validation program listed in my book.
	Many of you who have that book are keenly aware of the consolidation program, suggested routine to a new improved version of the consolidation program.
	Before I outline the program. However, I'd like to give you a good idea as to what you might, realistically expect in the way of progress.
	I will recount the success. Stories are two of my local clients in Marina Del Rey, California. The first is a very nice young fella. Named Andrew Tucker visa to live in the u.s. From England and Drew is an extremely intelligent young man. Who at the age of 22 is literally one of the handful of individuals in the world was considerable knowledge, doing computer-generated Jurassic Park.
	Just a little background material and Andrew. I didn't think he was all that spend, but it did give him some psychological problem.
	With the program that I'm going to whisper you today.
	Where he did only two sets per workout once a week to 2:10.
	And within four, and a half months that his dad left went from 170 to 380 in the same.
	Not long after Andrew side with me another young fellow John school was cause one of my favorite client approach to me also complaining of being painfully thin which in this case, he really wants her alone to the side.
	Where he confided in me that for his entire life, he suffered an enormous psychological complexes being so thin.
	he tried every type of program, the weeder program with metrics than the
	Buy back program with L. Probably tried everything you can imagine.
	He was the type of guy you used to joke about in the locker room. You know, I hate to see this guy stand over the shower drain. We might lose them. She really was very thin.
	Within three months, the program. I'm going to look for you today from 147 pounds of 61 until now he weighs just shy of 175.
	What does deadlift going from 165 to 3:45? And he's well on his way. He will never again. Suffer the problems associated with being terribly, thin and only training once for the past, three and a half months.
	Now make no mistake properly conducted, high intensity training program.
	Of course, not everyone of you and here will gain that well, although many will some of you will gain even more.
	For those of you who find stories such as these inspirational, you might check out my website at w.w. Mike mentzer. Com.
	A number of these success stories have with them, the phone numbers of the individuals listed so you can call them and check for authenticity. None of this is lies.
	You know, nothing about high-intensity and 3 months and almost double your dad left. It may sound impossible, but
	Because we're going to this point, but you don't have to remain in the room.
	The following routine.
	The program here listed from one perspective. They literal perfect bodybuilding program. If you keep in mind, there's one thing that the ideal. Can I see be able to let me explain.
	Bearing in mind. All the while that, as I stated earlier, few of volume, number of that is a negative factor. You will perform two different workouts referred to as workout a and workout this.
	You will do one workout a week.
	So if you start on a Saturday for as this doesn't have to be a Saturday with workout perform workout until the next Saturday.
	and if a scheduling conflict arises, as a
	Don't go back to the, don't reduce.
	And after 8 or 8 or so, total workout full week off then resume training once every nine days. And for the following reasons.
	In fact, this is the most important issue in exercise science. Once you have first understood what you heard earlier, the fundamentals of intensity, volume and frequency.
	After 8 or so total workout, take two weeks off and resume training once every nine days for the following reasons.
	You will grow stronger as a result of every workout without a doubt, unless you're extremely genetically.
	You will grow stronger, as a result of each workout. You will another words audience, be lifting progressively, heavier weights, all the time.
	Do you see where I stand to reason, beer list?
	If you don't do something to compensate compensate for the ever-growing stress, the stress has will reach a critical points such as they constitute overtraining.
	The first course will be a Slowdown in progress. Progress, note. Is this picking point?
	I like everyone else up until recently used to believe that you had to reposition for it. It was inevitable progressively heavier weights.
	This can be prevented from facing layoffs.
	How many articles have you seen in the last 20 years where they address the issue of sticking points at all?
	Not that many subjects because they have no slightest clue as to how to answer it if I can.
	But I do grow bigger and stronger. Your hand like 500 lb over, try and very easily. So you don't try and more as you grow, bigger and stronger. You and you'll keep growing.
	Alright, let's move to the workout workout. A
	will consist of number one, a set of squats preferably on a Smith machine, 1915 Raptor failure.
	If you don't have a face a Smith machine, don't worry about it. Just do regular old-fashioned freeway for.
	After I take a brief rest.
	Get a drink of water like your breathing slow down, as soon as you clearly recognize, you're ready to go. Boom. You go to exercise number to close-grip Palms up, pull down.
	46210 Raptor failure.
	Now by close-grip by me. And your grip should be about 8 inches apart your hand not calm down. So I can read palms up, pull down by the way, your number, if you are triggering.
	Be sure to initiate this movement. The pull-downs is with extreme deliberate. There should be no sudden jerking Yankee North rushing to get the way started in the keep it moving.
	Not super slow but relatively slow you want to lift the weight under for muscular control the momentarily and the contracted position are for 2 to 3 seconds and lower under control.
	I have I have discovered recently through my own workouts that this usually translates into a for 24 case for S down to S hole and for s f s or 1.2. Don't worry about it too much.
	Golfer workout exercises.
	One week later. You'll perform workout me which will consist of number one a set of regular not just legator Sumo but regular old-fashioned powerlifter deadlift for 5 to a failure.
	As the deadlift is properly regarded by most as the greatest overall strength and mass Builder.
	However, there is a risk factor singing with the dead left. You don't see with a lot of other exercises as I explain proper form, or did you do that?
	I would suggest you if you can if you're strong enough, use an Olympic Bar with a 45lb plate on each side so you don't have to bend over. So damn far.
	Start with a bar rollback flush against your skin.
	Start with a bar rollback against your chin.
	I'm not going to ask you to do some Belle bench. Press is on a Swiss ball or heavy squats while jumping up and down on the trampoline like polycon would have you do.
	Grasp the bar with a slightly wider than shoulder-width grip. The interlock one hand is underhand. One hand over head, that way. At the bar. Either way. It's listing of the other hand.
	Squat down and specify that. Your hips are buttocks. Are at least slightly lower than your shoulder and most important of all, keep your back flat and your head up and your head up, or drop your head.
	Of your arms, visualize your arms is just a straight up and down with hooks on the end, your hand.
	The bar, the bar with your arm.
	Then I'm sorry, then lower and reset psychologically. Take a deep breath and repeat again 528. Rest of failure.
	F.
	Lower back.
	Yes, as long as you know, why this week in our yard out about the sensation. I might be paying check it out. Get it checked out.
	No, all the way down.
	Are you less likely to hurt yourself?
	And again, as a trade, if you want to do it that way, that's up to you. You're not going to be able to sue me anyway.
	Just momentarily long enough to take a deep breath and reset.
	After the deadlift, take a brief one or two minute rest then proceed to dip regular parallel bar, dips. Just like you did back in high school gym class.
	Do the Jets like the pull down under. Muscular control for 6 to 10 rep. If you can do more than 10 rest, as I rather suspect, most of you can do.
	You don't have access to one if you can't do dips.
	And that's all for workout, be.
	Now, I have no doubt with some of your men sir. That's all you got to be fucking crazy.
	Well, remember how many basic Rose mechanism in no more?
	There are hundreds of exercises you could do, but where do you draw the line?
	Very often, tell us a new phone consultation client to do this workout. He'll say, but Mike, how about the leg curls for the hamstring? No bent over dumbbell concentration. Curls like Arnold says, for the lower outer 32nd of the bicep.
	How about seated calf raises for that special part of the calf, or this for that? That's where this on and on ad infinitum and I respond rather firmly, but sir, that's precisely what the hell you were doing before? And that was your phone service, as whether you realize it or not.
	Your problem I can tell you is that you so burn yourself out with all those pets trying to build in the detail. Why don't you build a 20-inch arm first?
	You see the point is possible, possible, phone number from $10,000 to lie.
	I wish I was making enough to afford that.
	And also, of course, you're not morally legally bound people to do this whole program, the rest of your life. However, consider trying,
	I have no doubt that it is of you and hear you and you're not making any meaningful progress.
	The type of routine I'm giving you those, there are there. No isolation exercises involved here. Rest pause, but
	This is a line program throwing in all these others and you would have called me for a phone consultation. I wouldn't know how to respect your progress.
	I always dark people out on this bare-bones. Start-up Baseline program.
	Minutes ago, that from a certain perspective, this program is the perfect. Drink for bodybuilding training program. Interesting to know here.
	I have a few clients doing but one set of workout. In fact, my best gaming client ever. Literally the phone client, this young fellow Will Robertson is a very bright 21 year old with the greatest vocabulary I've ever seen with anyone that young a brilliant young kid. He's an English literature major at the University of North Carolina.
	Are the crucial find a bodybuilder who jumbled years going from 125 lb of 56 to his high of 250, four five, six and four years.
	A few years ago, when will first lines up with me as a phone flying. He was having very severe, psychological problems being so send.
	Here's the kind of huge myself, whether to the library to study for the cafeteria for lunch, two classes.
	He just wasn't psychologically prepared. For all the attention, his enormous muscles would gain him.
	Anyone at this point in his training only doing one set for workout and he still growing.
	Let's return to the, why, why is this program? That I'm I just gave you from one perspective again?
	Well, let's look at the pole down.
	And it just so happens to be true audience. The clothes ripped Palms up, pull down, is the best bicep exercise in the world. Better than any curl, you can do. There's, why is Carl weather at the barbell curl and novelist curl. A dumbbell curl, whatever you're working this muscle around the single, join the elbow, which is why distress as Limited
	When doing a grip Palms up, pull down. On the other hand, you're working the bicep around the joint, the elbow joint and the shoulder. The muscle is contracted more uniformly from both.
	Think of the depth of the upper body squat Star by far without a doubt, their unparalleled. They are the best exercise for text Delton.
	Did any of you happen to catch to go on 4th?
	There were three Americans who work the parallel bars. You may recall three American gymnast, who work the parallel bars shoulders and arms like those other than glitter life. He knows those three.
	Ever heard of him.
	Heavily muscled guy.
	Sassy supinator the palm of his right hand to put on the truck. The point here is that this program will stimulate muscle.
	My suggestion is that you do. Regimen for at least, six months in order to maximize your body's anabolic process at the least amount possible.
	A few final points on the program, don't make the mistake of gauging or evaluating and evaluating are not important.
	What We're undeniable? Irrefutable proof that growth was stimulated. Then all those knuckleheads. I see down at Gold's Gym, in Venice. Were right down the street from my office phone number in the process of learning. But
	These guys would have 39 in Charmed by now because they should be getting pumped to Everyday twice a day. Even three times a day for the pump. Obviously, of course is only temporary, but you're lucky. It's only 20 minutes.
	The main point is this, you won't know that any one of these workouts was a successful work out until the next time you do that workout.
	Important Point. By the way, you should want to know that every workout was a successful workout. I'm still amazed at how many people are willing to try and literally years with little or no progress or analyze, what I'm doing a proprietary other than you might be suffering from some undiagnosed disease.
	About the possibility in this day and age.
	If you are growing stronger. Every workout, obviously a positive changes, taking place in your muscle workout, but the stronger getting something positive happen.
	So the point here is keep a training Journal, Record the beginning.
	Enumerate the exercises with the amount of weight and accurately record their number of reps place. She goes, even A1 Roofing three can be significant.
	You will grow stronger, each and every workout from the program listed in far as you're too. But only, if you are, obtaining adequate nutrition in the guiding principle. Get a well-balanced diet and 15%
	All these other ratios you've been reading about lately, come from, not reputable nutritional scientist, but and nutritional mythology.
	If you're getting a well-balanced diet, if you're on painting your nail, a compliment of the four, basic food groups.
	Remember, my cell is not mostly protein is mostly water. Look at the look at the word carbohydrates. As you probably all know the carbohydrate stores in the muscle, becomes a chain of sugar, molecules called water, when you go lower than 60%, carbohydrates on a high intensity program, a bonded will leave them.
	Go to the liver and through a very complicated process called gluconeogenesis will turn your own body protein in the sugar.
	Do sugar ants. The bogeyman has been made out to be a dominate in a well-balanced diet for your own genetic by eating a thing as Supernatural. Only Optimum Nutrition, your body can only utilize so much nutrient. Any access to either be excreted or
	Why. Thank you very much again for coming out on a Saturday.
	



	